= time_of_day

Have you already worked with a database Time column and an Active Record model together?
If you had, you know: it sucks. Well, not anymore.

== Setup

In the +Gemfile+ add:
  
  gem 'time_of_day', :git => 'git://github.com/lailsonbm/time_of_day'

Run +bundler+:

  bundle install

Just that.

== The problem

Sometimes we need to work with time-only objects.
Suppose, for example, you're working on a train table web application and want to register
trips between stations. Every day, the train departures on a defined time and, some minutes
later, it arrives at the next station.

So lets dive into Rails and do it. You'll end up with a migration and a model like this:
  
  # Migration
  class CreateTrips < ActiveRecord::Migration
    def self.up
      create_table :trips do |t|
        t.string :train, :leaving_from, :arriving_at
        t.time :departure, :arrival
      end
    end

    def self.down
      drop_table :trips
    end
  end
  
  # Dumb AR model
  class Trip < ActiveRecord::Base
  end

Cool. Just after a <code>rake db:migrate</code>, we can create trips and tell if the train will be
on any of them at a given time:

  trip = Trip.new
  trip.departure = '10:00'
  trip.arrival = '10:10'
  
  # Will the train be on this trip at 10:05?
  time = Time.parse('10:05')
  (trip.departure..trip.arrival).cover?(time) # OR
  (trip.departure <= time && trip.arrival >= time) # if you are old fashioned =P
  
You might be surprised to know: this code does not work. At least not as we expected: both 
statements return false. The problem is caused by the way Active Record handles time-only attributes.
SQL has the +time+ data type, that represents just a time of day, but Ruby doesn't 
have such thing. So, Active Record represent time attributes using the +Time+ class on
the canonical (and arbitrary) date <code>2000-01-01</code>. This is okay when you are comparing only attributes
since their date will be equal and just the time will be compared. However, when you compare an
attribute with another time instance, you start to need silly workarounds. In this case, the code does not work
because <code>Time#parse</code> yields the current date (e.g. <code>2010-06-25 10:05</code>) and of course it is not between 
<code>2000-01-01 10:00</code> and <code>2000-01-01 10:10</code>. To accomplish what you were trying to do, you have two alternatives:

  # Always use the date 01/01/2000 for any time you want to compare (notice the Z for UTC time zone)
  time = Time.parse('2000-01-01 10:05Z')
  (trip.departure..trip.arrival).cover?(time) # => true
  
  # OR compare always considering the seconds since midnight
  seconds = time.seconds_since_midnight
  (trip.departure.seconds_since_midnight <= seconds && trip.arrival.seconds_since_midnight >= seconds) # => true

Sorry, but both options suck.

== How time_of_day handles the problem

There are many ways to fix this issue. Subclassing +Time+ would be certainly the purest OO
solution, but I found that monkey patching it is much more practical. So, it's what +time_of_day+
does. It adds some methods to +Time+ for representing times of day, instead of time with dates.
  
  # Suppose today is June 25, 2010
  time1 = Time.parse('10:00') # => 2010-06-25 10:00:00
  time2 = Time.parse('2010-06-01 10:00') # => 2010-06-01 10:00:00
  time1 == time2 # => false
  
  # Ignoring the dates
  time1.time_of_day!
  time2.time_of_day! 
  time1 == time2 # => true
  
So, now you can ignore the date information and compare just time. The most exciting thing, 
though, is that Active Record time attributes are now always mapped to times of day:

  trip = Trip.new
  trip.departure = '10:00'
  trip.arrival = '10:10'
  
  trip.departure.time_of_day? # => true
  trip.arrival.time_of_day? # => true
  
At this time, the code works effortlessly:

  time = Time.parse('10:05').time_of_day!
  (trip.departure..trip.arrival).cover?(time) # => true
  (trip.departure <= time && trip.arrival >= time) # => true
  
And you go home earlier.

== Compatibility
 
Tested with Rails 3.0.0 on Ruby 1.9.2-p0 and Ruby 1.8.7.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010 Lailson Bandeira (http://lailsonbandeira.com). See LICENSE for details.
